Improvements for the Index basics overview page (#5279)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/data-store/index-basics.md

Reviewer: because this page was the former home for many tutorial/how-to pieces, consider having a quick jump list to key procedures (let the page be a roundup/map to the places where you rehomed the instructions)

# Index basics

> An _index_ is the fundamental unit of storage in {{es}}, and the level at which you interact with your data. To store a document, you add it to a specific index. To search, you target one or more indices and {{es}} searches all data within them and returns any matching documents. An index is identified by a unique name or an [alias](/manage-data/data-store/aliases.md).

Reviewer: wonder if it's worth saying that an index could also be identified by a data stream name. I know it's not the exact same (and you know data streams better than me) but it feels similar to the way an alias works in terms of targeting searches)

# Index basics

> An _index_ is the fundamental unit of storage in {{es}}, and the level at which you interact with your data. Behind the scenes, {{es}} divides each index into _shards_ and distributes them across the nodes in your cluster. This allows it to scale horizontally to handle large volumes of data. Replica shards provide fault tolerance, keeping your data available even when individual nodes fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An _index_ is the fundamental unit of storage in {{es}}, and the level at which you interact with your data. Behind the scenes, {{es}} divides each index into _shards_ and distributes them across the nodes in your cluster. This horizontal scaling of your _primary_ shard into _replicas_ across other nodes allows your index to handle large volumes of traffic. Replica shards provide fault tolerance, keeping your data available even when an individual nodes' response fails.
```
Problem: Shards do distribute to other nodes which is a form of horizontal scaling, but that doesn't solve "handling large volumes of data" directly AFAIK. Close-but-not-that-ideas: It enables it to dynamically handle large volumes of traffic accessing your data (replicas frequently help search speed because of node adaptive selection). It does improve resiliency to reduce need for or time spent restoring from snapshot, if that's what you're going for? Did a guess sentence.

To store a document, you add it to a specific index. To search, you target one or more indices and {{es}} searches all data within them and returns any matching documents. You can target your data by index name, through an [alias](/manage-data/data-store/aliases.md) that points to one or more indices or through a [data stream](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams.md) that routes requests to the appropriate backing indices.

You can store many independent datasets side by side, each in its own index, and search them individually or together.

This page explains the core parts of an index (_documents_, _metadata fields_, and _mappings_), describes how {{es}} physically stores index data using _shards_, and highlights common design decisions.

:::{note}
:applies_to: {"serverless": "ga"}

In {{serverless-full}}:
* Shards, replicas, and nodes are fully managed for you. The platform automatically scales resources based on your workload, so you don't need to configure or monitor these details. The shard-related content on this page explains how {{es}} works under the hood.

> * Each project supports up to 15,000 indices. This limit helps ensure reliable performance and stability. If you need a higher limit, you can [request an increase](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/differences-from-other-elasticsearch-offerings.md#index-and-resource-limits). For index sizing recommendations, refer to [index sizing guidelines](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/differences-from-other-elasticsearch-offerings.md#elasticsearch-differences-serverless-index-size).

Reviewer 2: Optional: you might need a qualifier that that's definitely indices & not 15K data streams 🙂

# Index basics

An _index_ is the fundamental unit of storage in {{es}}, and the level at which you interact with your data. You can store many independent datasets side by side. 

> Behind the scenes, {{es}} divides each index into _shards_ and distributes them across the nodes in your cluster. The horizontal scaling of your _primary_ shard into _replicas_ shards across other nodes allows your index to handle large volumes of traffic. Replica shards provide fault tolerance, keeping your data available even when an individual node's response fails.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Behind the scenes, {{es}} divides each index into _shards_ and distributes them across the nodes in your cluster. The horizontal scaling of your _primary_ shard into _replica_ shards across other nodes allows your index to handle large volumes of traffic efficiently. Replica shards provide fault tolerance, keeping your data available even when an individual node's response fails.
```

### Metadata fields [elasticsearch-intro-documents-fields-data-metadata]

An indexed document includes both source data and metadata. [Metadata fields](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/document-metadata-fields.md) are system-managed fields that describe the document and how {{es}} stores it. In {{es}}, metadata fields are prefixed with an underscore. For example:

* `_index`: The name of the index where the document is stored.
* `_id`: The document's ID. IDs must be unique per index.

### Mappings and data types [elasticsearch-intro-documents-fields-mappings]

> Each index has a [mapping](/manage-data/data-store/mapping.md) that defines field types and indexing behavior. Mappings determine how fields are stored, queried, and aggregated.

Reviewer: mappings do not determine how fields are queried. indexed yes. don't know about aggregated.

## How an index stores data

When you create an index, {{es}} doesn't store all its documents in a single location. Instead, it divides the index into one or more _shards_ and distributes those shards across the nodes in your cluster. The primary purpose of shards is to allow an index to scale beyond what a single server could handle. The right number of shards depends on your data volume, query patterns, and cluster topology — there is no single correct answer.

> You don't interact with shards directly. When you index or search documents, you target the index by name and {{es}} routes the operation to the appropriate shards. When you search an index, all of its shards are searched and the matching documents are returned.

Reviewer: you don't interact with them, but you set them and design them. I realize the design decisions are in another section (which I like), but let's give people lots. of exits

Each shard is a self-contained instance of [Apache Lucene](https://lucene.apache.org/), the search library that powers {{es}}. A shard holds a subset of the index's documents and can independently handle indexing and search operations. Inside each shard, data is organized into immutable _segments_ that are written as documents are indexed. To learn how segments affect search availability, refer to [Near real-time search](/manage-data/data-store/near-real-time-search.md).

There are two types of shards:

> * **Primary shards**: Every document belongs to exactly one primary shard. The number of primary shards is set when the index is created.

Author: On it!

> * **Replica shards**: Copies of primary shards that provide redundancy and serve read requests. You can adjust the number of replicas at any time.

Reviewer: I think hinting at how to set a number of replicas is helpful here (even with a link). i see that I can adjust it and then am lost

* `_id`: The document's ID. IDs must be unique per index.

For example, an API response includes these metadata fields alongside the document body:

```js
{
  "_index": "my-first-elasticsearch-index", <1>
  "_id": "DyFpo5EBxE8fzbb95DOa", <1>
  "_version": 1, <1>
  "_source": { <2>
    "email": "john@smith.com",
    "first_name": "John"
  }
}
```
1. These metadata fields describe the document.
2. The `_source` field contains the original document body as submitted.

### Mappings and data types [elasticsearch-intro-documents-fields-mappings]

Each index has a [mapping](/manage-data/data-store/mapping.md) that defines field types and indexing behavior. A mapping defines the [data type](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/field-data-types.md) for each field, how the field should be indexed, and how it should be stored.

For example, the following mapping defines field types for a few common data types:
```js
{
  "properties": {
    "email":      { "type": "keyword" },
    "first_name": { "type": "text" },
    "age":        { "type": "integer" },
    "join_date":  { "type": "date" }
  }
}
```

## How an index stores data

> When you create an index, {{es}} doesn't store all its documents in a single location. Instead, it divides the index into one or more _shards_ and distributes those shards across the nodes in your cluster. The primary purpose of shards is to allow an index to scale beyond what a single server could handle. The right number of shards depends on your data volume, query patterns, and cluster topology — there is no single correct answer.

Reviewer 2: FOR_STEF on Saturday: Stef you're to here 😄
